WELL! I have determined — lightly it may be — hut when there is nothing to live for — nothing that the heart craves anxiously and devotedly, life is but a kind of prison house from which we would be freed.

I feel even at this moment a something of impatience to know what death is — end although I am now writing the very last words this band will ever trace — yet even the outward show — the trifles of the world beguile me —

The ink is not good-1 have stirred it — ‘tie better now, and I have mended my pen — ‘tis disagreeable, even if it is our very last letter, to write with a bad pen — a blot! — I must erase it — this when an hour will finish my existence! — an existence of wretchedness — one of weary, bitter disappointment.

I feel as if hungry, and suddenly a sumptuous feast before me — surfeiting myself — revelling in my thoughts — indulging in what I have been afraid to think of — I have but a short hour to live, and the ticking of the clock before me, seems a laughing spectator of my death — I wish it had life — it would not then be so gay — nay, it might be a partner of my melancholy.

Pshaw! this pen — surely my hand must have trembled when I made it — I have held it up to the light — Heavens! my hand does tremble — No! tis only the flickering of the Lamp.

It will — at least it may he asked, why I have done this they may say I was insane — the body which is earthed cannot feel their taunts, and the soul cares not.

I have a strange wish even at this time — it is that some maiden would plant flowers on my grave — which my mortality would add life to.

When there is no hope — no cheering prospect to brighten, oe land to mark the bewildered seaman’s way — why inn try death?

“And come it slow or come it fast,

I is but death that comes at last.”

There are many who would rather linger in a life of wretchedness, disappointment — and other causes which bright many a youthful heart, arid make ruin and desolation in the warmest feelings — yes! even the lip must smile and the eye be gay — although when night brings us to our couch at; [page 61:] unconsciously wish it was for the last time.

Such is man — such is mankind! — I have still one half hour to live — one half hour! — yet I look around me as if it was the journey of a day, and not an eternal adieu! — Why should I live? Delighting in one object, and she

“The fairest flower that glittered on a stem

To wither at my grasp.”

No more —— the pistol — I have loaded it — the balls are new — quite bright — they will soon be in any heart — Incomprehensible death — what art thou?

I have put the pistol to my bosom — it snapped. — I had forgotten to prime it — I must do it —

In the act of doing so it went off and I awoke and found myself rolling on the floor, having fallen from my bed in the agitation of a most strange and singular inures.