In the spring of 1829, the author of this work, whom curiosity had
brought into Spain, made a rambling expedition from Seville to Granada
in company with a friend, a member of the Russian Embassy at Madrid.
Accident had thrown us together from distant regions of the globe and a
similarity of taste led us to wander together among the romantic
mountains of Andalusia. Should these pages meet his eye, wherever thrown
by the duties of his station, whether mingling in the pageantry of
courts, or meditating on the truer glories of nature, may they recall
the scenes of our adventurous companionship, and with them the
recollection of one, in whom neither time nor distance will obliterate
the remembrance of his gentleness and worth.[1]

And here, before setting forth, let me indulge in a few previous remarks
on Spanish scenery and Spanish travelling. Many are apt to picture Spain
to their imaginations as a soft southern region, decked out with the
luxuriant charms of voluptuous Italy. On the contrary, though there are
exceptions in some of the maritime provinces, yet, for the greater part,
it is a stern, melancholy country, with rugged mountains, and long
sweeping plains, destitute of trees, and indescribably silent and
lonesome, partaking of the savage and solitary character of Africa. What
adds to this silence and loneliness, is the absence of singing-birds, a
natural consequence of the want of groves and hedges. The vulture and
the eagle are seen wheeling about the mountain-cliffs, and soaring over
the plains, and groups of shy bustards stalk about the heaths; but the
myriads of smaller birds, which animate the whole face of other
countries, are met with in but few provinces in Spain, and in those
chiefly among the orchards and gardens which surround the habitations of
man.

In the interior provinces the traveller occasionally traverses great
tracts cultivated with grain as far as the eye can reach, waving at
times with verdure, at other times naked and sunburnt, but he looks
round in vain for the hand that has tilled the soil. At length he
perceives some village on a steep hill, or rugged crag, with mouldering
battlements and ruined watchtower: a stronghold, in old times, against
civil war, or Moorish inroad; for the custom among the peasantry of
congregating together for mutual protection is still kept up in most
parts of Spain, in consequence of the maraudings of roving freebooters.

But though a great part of Spain is deficient in the garniture of groves
and forests, and the softer charms of ornamental cultivation, yet its
scenery is noble in its severity and in unison with the attributes of
its people; and I think that I better understand the proud, hardy,
frugal, and abstemious Spaniard, his manly defiance of hardships, and
contempt of effeminate indulgences, since I have seen the country he
inhabits.

There is something, too, in the sternly simple features of the Spanish
landscape, that impresses on the soul a feeling of sublimity. The
immense plains of the Castiles and of La Mancha, extending as far as the
eye can reach, derive an interest from their very nakedness and
immensity, and possess, in some degree, the solemn grandeur of the
ocean. In ranging over these boundless wastes, the eye catches sight
here and there of a straggling herd of cattle attended by a lonely
herdsman, motionless as a statue, with his long slender pike tapering up
like a lance into the air; or beholds a long train of mules slowly
moving along the waste like a train of camels in the desert; or a single
horseman, armed with blunderbuss and stiletto, and prowling over the
plain. Thus the country, the habits, the very looks of the people, have
something of the Arabian character. The general insecurity of the
country is evinced in the universal use of weapons. The herdsman in the
field, the shepherd in the plain, has his musket and his knife. The
wealthy villager rarely ventures to the market-town without his trabuco,
and, perhaps, a servant on foot with a blunderbuss on his shoulder; and
the most petty journey is undertaken with the preparation of a warlike
enterprise.

The dangers of the road produce also a mode of travelling resembling, on
a diminutive scale, the caravans of the East. The arrieros, or carriers,
congregate in convoys, and set off in large and well-armed trains on
appointed days; while additional travellers swell their number, and
contribute to their strength. In this primitive way is the commerce of
the country carried on. The muleteer is the general medium of traffic,
and the legitimate traverser of the land, crossing the peninsula from
the Pyrenees and the Asturias to the Alpuxarras, the Serrania de Ronda,
and even to the gates of Gibraltar. He lives frugally and hardily: his
alforjas of coarse cloth hold his scanty stock of provisions; a leathern
bottle, hanging at his saddle-bow, contains wine or water, for a supply
across barren mountains and thirsty plains; a mule-cloth spread upon the
ground is his bed at night, and his pack-saddle his pillow. His low, but
clean-limbed and sinewy form betokens strength; his complexion is dark
and sunburnt; his eye resolute, but quiet in its expression, except
when kindled by sudden emotion; his demeanor is frank, manly, and
courteous, and he never passes you without a grave salutation: “Dios
guarde à usted!” “Va usted con Dios, Caballero!” “God guard you!” “God
be with you, Cavalier!”

As these men have often their whole fortune at stake upon the burden of
their mules, they have their weapons at hand, slung to their saddles,
and ready to be snatched out for desperate defence; but their united
numbers render them secure against petty bands of marauders, and the
solitary bandolero, armed to the teeth, and mounted on his Andalusian
steed, hovers about them, like a pirate about a merchant convoy, without
daring to assault.

The Spanish muleteer has an inexhaustible stock of songs and ballads,
with which to beguile his incessant wayfaring. The airs are rude and
simple, consisting of but few inflections. These he chants forth with a
loud voice, and long, drawling cadence, seated sideways on his mule, who
seems to listen with infinite gravity, and to keep time, with his paces,
to the tune. The couplets thus chanted are often old traditional
romances about the Moors, or some legend of a saint, or some love-ditty;
or, what is still more frequent, some ballad about a bold
contrabandista, or hardy bandolero, for the smuggler and the robber are
poetical heroes among the common people of Spain. Often, the song of the
muleteer is composed at the instant, and relates to some local scene, or
some incident of the journey. This talent of singing and improvising is
frequent in Spain, and is said to have been inherited from the Moors.
There is something wildly pleasing in listening to these ditties among
the rude and lonely scenes they illustrate; accompanied, as they are, by
the occasional jingle of the mule-bell.

It has a most picturesque effect also to meet a train of muleteers in
some mountain-pass. First you hear the bells of the leading mules
breaking with their simple melody the stillness of the airy height; or,
perhaps, the voice of the muleteer admonishing some tardy or wandering
animal, or chanting, at the full stretch of his lungs, some traditionary
ballad. At length you see the mules slowly winding along the cragged
defile, sometimes descending precipitous cliffs, so as to present
themselves in full relief against the sky, sometimes toiling up the deep
arid chasms below you. As they approach, you descry their gay
decorations of worsted stuffs, tassels, and saddle-cloths, while, as
they pass by, the ever ready trabuco, slung behind the packs and
saddles, gives a hint of the insecurity of the road.

The ancient kingdom of Granada, into which we were about to penetrate,
is one of the most mountainous regions of Spain. Vast sierras, or chains
of mountains, destitute of shrub or tree, and mottled with variegated
marbles and granites, elevate their sunburnt summits against a deep-blue
sky; yet in their rugged bosoms lie ingulfed verdant and fertile
valleys, where the desert and the garden strive for mastery, and the
very rock is, as it were, compelled to yield the fig, the orange, and
the citron, and to blossom with the myrtle and the rose.

In the wild passes of these mountains the sight of walled towns and
villages, built like eagles’ nests among the cliffs, and surrounded by
Moorish battlements, or of ruined watch-towers perched on lofty peaks,
carries the mind back to the chivalric days of Christian and Moslem
warfare, and to the romantic struggle for the conquest of Granada. In
traversing these lofty sierras the traveller is often obliged to alight,
and lead his horse up and down the steep and jagged ascents and
descents, resembling the broken steps of a staircase. Sometimes the road
winds along dizzy precipices, without parapet to guard him from the
gulfs below, and then will plunge down steep and dark and dangerous
declivities. Sometimes it struggles through rugged barrancos, or
ravines, worn by winter torrents, the obscure path of the
contrabandista; while, ever and anon, the ominous cross, the monument of
robbery and murder, erected on a mound of stones at some lonely part of
the road, admonishes the traveller that he is among the haunts of
banditti, perhaps at that very moment under the eye of some lurking
bandolero. Sometimes, in winding through the narrow valleys, he is
startled by a hoarse bellowing, and beholds above him on some green fold
of the mountain a herd of fierce Andalusian bulls, destined for the
combat of the arena. I have felt, if I may so express it, an agreeable
horror in thus contemplating, near at hand, these terrific animals,
clothed with tremendous strength, and ranging their native pastures in
untamed wildness, strangers almost to the face of man: they know no one
but the solitary herdsman who attends upon them, and even he at times
dares not venture to approach them. The low bellowing of these bulls,
and their menacing aspect as they look down from their rocky height,
give additional wildness to the savage scenery.

I have been betrayed unconsciously into a longer disquisition than I
intended on the general features of Spanish travelling; but there is a
romance about all the recollections of the Peninsula dear to the
imagination.

As our proposed route to Granada lay through mountainous regions, where
the roads are little better than mule-paths, and said to be frequently
beset by robbers, we took due travelling precautions. Forwarding the
most valuable part of our luggage a day or two in advance by the
arrieros, we retained merely clothing and necessaries for the journey
and money for the expenses of the road; with a little surplus of hard
dollars by way of _robber purse_, to satisfy the gentlemen of the road
should we be assailed. Unlucky is the too wary traveller who, having
grudged this precaution, falls into their clutches empty-handed; they
are apt to give him a sound ribroasting for cheating them out of their
dues. “Caballeros like them cannot afford to scour the roads and risk
the gallows for nothing.”

A couple of stout steeds were provided for our own mounting, and a third
for our scanty luggage and the conveyance of a sturdy Biscayan lad,
about twenty years of age, who was to be our guide, our groom, our
valet, and at all times our guard. For the latter office he was provided
with a formidable trabuco or carbine, with which he promised to defend
us against rateros or solitary footpads; but as to powerful bands, like
that of the “Sons of Ecija,” he confessed they were quite beyond his
prowess. He made much vainglorious boast about his weapon at the outset
of the journey; though, to the discredit of his generalship, it was
suffered to hang unloaded behind his saddle.

According to our stipulations, the man from whom we hired the horses was
to be at the expense of their feed and stabling on the journey, as well
as of the maintenance of our Biscayan squire, who of course was provided
with funds for the purpose; we took care, however, to give the latter a
private hint, that, though we made a close bargain with his master, it
was all in his favor, as, if he proved a good man and true, both he and
the horses should live at our cost, and the money provided for their
maintenance remain in his pocket. This unexpected largess, with the
occasional present of a cigar, won his heart completely. He was, in
truth, a faithful, cheery, kind-hearted creature, as full of saws and
proverbs as that miracle of squires, the renowned Sancho himself, whose
name, by the by, we bestowed upon him, and, like a true Spaniard,
though treated by us with companionable familiarity, he never for a
moment, in his utmost hilarity, overstepped the bounds of respectful
decorum.

Such were our minor preparations for the journey, but above all we laid
in an ample stock of good-humor, and a genuine disposition to be
pleased; determining to travel in true contrabandista style; taking
things as we found them, rough or smooth, and mingling with all classes
and conditions in a kind of vagabond companionship. It is the true way
to travel in Spain. With such disposition and determination, what a
country is it for a traveller, where the most miserable inn is as full
of adventure as an enchanted castle, and every meal is in itself an
achievement! Let others repine at the lack of turnpike roads and
sumptuous hotels, and all the elaborate comforts of a country cultivated
and civilized into tameness and commonplace; but give me the rude
mountain scramble; the roving, hap-hazard, wayfaring; the half wild, yet
frank and hospitable manners, which impart such a true game-flavor to
dear old romantic Spain!

Thus equipped and attended, we cantered out of “Fair Seville city” at
half-past six in the morning of a bright May day, in company with a lady
and gentleman of our acquaintance, who rode a few miles with us, in the
Spanish mode of taking leave. Our route lay through old Alcala de
Guadaira (Alcala on the river Aira), the benefactress of Seville, that
supplies it with bread and water. Here live the bakers who furnish
Seville with that delicious bread for which it is renowned; here are
fabricated those roscas well known by the well-merited appellation of
_pan de Dios_ (bread of God); with which, by the way, we ordered our
man, Sancho, to stock his alforjas for the journey. Well has this
beneficent little city been denominated the “Oven of Seville”; well has
it been called Alcala de los Panaderos (Alcala of the bakers), for a
great part of its inhabitants are of that handicraft, and the highway
hence to Seville is constantly traversed by lines of mules and donkeys
laden with great panniers of loaves and roscas.

I have said Alcala supplies Seville with water. Here are great tanks or
reservoirs, of Roman and Moorish construction, whence water is conveyed
to Seville by noble aqueducts. The springs of Alcala are almost as much
vaunted as its ovens; and to the lightness, sweetness, and purity of its
water is attributed in some measure the delicacy of its bread.

Here we halted for a time, at the ruins of the old Moorish castle, a
favorite resort for picnic parties from Seville, where we had passed
many a pleasant hour. The walls are of great extent, pierced with
loopholes; enclosing a huge square tower or keep, with the remains of
masmoras, or subterranean granaries. The Guadaira winds its stream round
the hill, at the foot of these ruins, whimpering among reeds, rushes,
and pond-lilies, and overhung with rhododendron, eglantine, yellow
myrtle, and a profusion of wild flowers and aromatic shrubs; while along
its banks are groves of oranges, citrons, and pomegranates, among which
we heard the early note of the nightingale.

A picturesque bridge was thrown across the little river, at one end of
which was the ancient Moorish mill of the castle, defended by a tower of
yellow stone; a fisherman’s net hung against the wall to dry, and hard
by in the river was his boat; a group of peasant women in bright-colored
dresses, crossing the arched bridge, were reflected in the placid
stream. Altogether it was an admirable scene for a landscape-painter.

The old Moorish mills, so often found on secluded streams, are
characteristic objects in Spanish landscape, and suggestive of the
perilous times of old. They are of stone, and often in the form of
towers with loopholes and battlements, capable of defence in those
warlike days when the country on both sides of the border was subject to
sudden inroad and hasty ravage, and when men had to labor with their
weapons at hand, and some place of temporary refuge.

Our next halting-place was at Gandul, where were the remains of another
Moorish castle, with its ruined tower, a nestling-place for storks, and
commanding a view over a vast campiña or fertile plain, with the
mountains of Ronda in the distance. These castles were strongholds to
protect the plains from the talas or forays to which they were subject,
when the fields of corn would be laid waste, the flocks and herds swept
from the vast pastures, and, together with captive peasantry, hurried
off in long cavalgadas across the borders.

At Gandul we found a tolerable posada; the good folks could not tell us
what time of day it was, the clock only struck once in the day, two
hours after noon; until that time it was guesswork. We guessed it was
full time to eat; so, alighting, we ordered a repast. While that was in
preparation, we visited the palace once the residence of the Marquis of
Gandul. All was gone to decay; there were but two or three rooms
habitable, and very poorly furnished. Yet here were the remains of
grandeur: a terrace, where fair dames and gentle cavaliers may once have
walked; a fish-pond and ruined garden, with grape-vines and date-bearing
palm-trees. Here we were joined by a fat curate, who gathered a bouquet
of roses, and presented it, very gallantly, to the lady who accompanied
us.

Below the palace was the mill, with orange-trees and aloes in front, and
a pretty stream of pure water. We took a seat in the shade; and the
millers, all leaving their work, sat down and smoked with us; for the
Andalusians are always ready for a gossip. They were waiting for the
regular visit of the barber, who came once a week to put all their chins
in order. He arrived shortly afterwards: a lad of seventeen, mounted on
a donkey, eager to display his new alforjas or saddle-bags, just bought
at a fair; price one dollar, to be paid on St. John’s day (in June), by
which time he trusted to have mown beards enough to put him in funds.

By the time the laconic clock of the castle had struck two we had
finished our dinner. So, taking leave of our Seville friends, and
leaving the millers still under the hands of the barber, we set off on
our ride across the campiña. It was one of those vast plains, common in
Spain, where for miles and miles there is neither house nor tree.
Unlucky the traveller who has to traverse it, exposed as we were to
heavy and repeated showers of rain. There is no escape nor shelter. Our
only protection was our Spanish cloaks, which nearly covered man and
horse, but grew heavier every mile. By the time we had lived through one
shower we would see another slowly but inevitably approaching;
fortunately in the interval there would be an outbreak of bright, warm,
Andalusian sunshine, which would make our cloaks send up wreaths of
steam, but which partially dried them before the next drenching.

Shortly after sunset we arrived at Arahal, a little town among the
hills. We found it in a bustle with a party of miquelets, who were
patrolling the country to ferret out robbers. The appearance of
foreigners like ourselves was an unusual circumstance in an interior
country town; and little Spanish towns of the kind are easily put in a
state of gossip and wonderment by such an occurrence. Mine host, with
two or three old wiseacre comrades in brown cloaks, studied our
passports in a corner of the posada, while an Alguazil took notes by the
dim light of a lamp. The passports were in foreign languages and
perplexed them, but our squire, Sancho, assisted them in their studies,
and magnified our importance with the grandiloquence of a Spaniard. In
the mean time the magnificent distribution of a few cigars had won the
hearts of all around us; in a little while the whole community seemed
put in agitation to make us welcome. The corregidor himself waited upon
us, and a great rush-bottomed arm-chair was ostentatiously bolstered
into our room by our landlady, for the accommodation of that important
personage. The commander of the patrol took supper with us: a lively,
talking, laughing Andaluz, who had made a campaign in South America, and
recounted his exploits in love and war with much pomp of phrase,
vehemence of gesticulation, and mysterious rolling of the eye. He told
us that he had a list of all the robbers in the country, and meant to
ferret out every mother’s son of them; he offered us at the same time
some of his soldiers as an escort. “One is enough to protect you,
Señors; the robbers know me, and know my men; the sight of one is enough
to spread terror through a whole sierra.” We thanked him for his offer,
but assured him, in his own strain, that with the protection of our
redoubtable squire, Sancho, we were not afraid of all the ladrones of
Andalusia.

While we were supping with our drawcansir friend, we heard the notes of
a guitar, and the click of castanets, and presently a chorus of voices
singing a popular air. In fact, mine host had gathered together the
amateur singers and musicians, and the rustic belles of the
neighborhood, and, on going forth, the courtyard or patio of the inn
presented a scene of true Spanish festivity. We took our seats with mine
host and hostess and the commander of the patrol, under an archway
opening into the court; the guitar passed from hand to hand, but a
jovial shoemaker was the Orpheus of the place. He was a
pleasant-looking fellow, with huge black whiskers; his sleeves were
rolled up to his elbows. He touched the guitar with masterly skill, and
sang a little amorous ditty with an expressive leer at the women, with
whom he was evidently a favorite. He afterwards danced a fandango with a
buxom Andalusian damsel, to the great delight of the spectators. But
none of the females present could compare with mine host’s pretty
daughter, Pepita, who had slipped away and made her toilette for the
occasion, and had covered her head with roses; and who distinguished
herself in a bolero with a handsome young dragoon. We ordered our host
to let wine and refreshment circulate freely among the company, yet,
though there was a motley assembly of soldiers, muleteers, and
villagers, no one exceeded the bounds of sober enjoyment. The scene was
a study for a painter: the picturesque group of dancers, the troopers in
their half military dresses, the peasantry wrapped in their brown
cloaks; nor must I omit to mention the old meagre Alguazil, in a short
black cloak, who took no notice of anything going on, but sat in a
corner diligently writing by the dim light of a huge copper lamp, that
might have figured in the days of Don Quixote.

The following morning was bright and balmy, as a May morning ought to
be, according to the poets. Leaving Arahal at seven o’clock, with all
the posada at the door to cheer us off, we pursued our way through a
fertile country, covered with grain and beautifully verdant; but which
in summer, when the harvest is over and the fields parched and brown,
must be monotonous and lonely; for, as in our ride of yesterday, there
were neither houses nor people to be seen. The latter all congregate in
villages and strongholds among the hills, as if these fertile plains
were still subject to the ravages of the Moor.

At noon we came to where there was a group of trees, beside a brook in a
rich meadow. Here we alighted to make our mid-day meal. It was really a
luxurious spot, among wild flowers and aromatic herbs, with birds
singing around us. Knowing the scanty larders of Spanish inns, and the
houseless tracts we might have to traverse, we had taken care to have
the alforjas of our squire well stocked with cold provisions, and his
bota, or leathern bottle, which might hold a gallon, filled to the neck
with choice Valdepeñas wine.[2] As we depended more upon these for our
well-being than even his trabuco, we exhorted him to be more attentive
in keeping them well charged; and I must do him the justice to say that
his namesake, the trencher-loving Sancho Panza, was never a more
provident purveyor. Though the alforjas and the bota were frequently and
vigorously assailed throughout the journey, they had a wonderful power
of repletion, our vigilant squire sacking everything that remained from
our repasts at the inns, to supply these junketings by the road-side,
which were his delight.

On the present occasion he spread quite a sumptuous variety of remnants
on the greensward before us, graced with an excellent ham brought from
Seville; then, taking his seat at a little distance, he solaced himself
with what remained in the alforjas. A visit or two to the bota made him
as merry and chirruping as a grasshopper filled with dew. On my
comparing his contents of the alforjas to Sancho’s skimming of the
flesh-pots at the wedding of Cammacho, I found he was well versed in
the history of Don Quixote, but, like many of the common people of
Spain, firmly believed it to be a true history.

“All that happened a long time ago, Señor,” said he, with an inquiring
look.

“A very long time,” I replied.

“I dare say more than a thousand years,”--still looking dubiously.

“I dare say not less.”

The squire was satisfied. Nothing pleased the simple-hearted varlet more
than my comparing him to the renowned Sancho for devotion to the
trencher; and he called himself by no other name throughout the journey.

Our repast being finished, we spread our cloaks on the greensward under
the tree, and took a luxurious siesta in the Spanish fashion. The
clouding up of the weather, however, warned us to depart, and a harsh
wind sprang up from the southeast. Towards five o’clock we arrived at
Osuna, a town of fifteen thousand inhabitants, situated on the side of a
hill, with a church and a ruined castle. The posada was outside of the
walls; it had a cheerless look. The evening being cold, the inhabitants
were crowded round a brasero in a chimney-corner; and the hostess was a
dry old woman, who looked like a mummy. Every one eyed us askance as we
entered, as Spaniards are apt to regard strangers; a cheery, respectful
salutation on our part, caballeroing them and touching our sombreros,
set Spanish pride at ease; and when we took our seat among them, lit our
cigars, and passed the cigar-box round among them, our victory was
complete. I have never known a Spaniard, whatever his rank or condition,
who would suffer himself to be outdone in courtesy; and to the common
Spaniard the present of a cigar (puro) is irresistible. Care, however,
must be taken never to offer him a present with an air of superiority
and condescension; he is too much of a caballero to receive favors at
the cost of his dignity.

Leaving Osuna at an early hour the next morning, we entered the sierra
or range of mountains. The road wound through picturesque scenery, but
lonely; and a cross here and there by the road-side, the sign of a
murder, showed that we were now coming among the “robber haunts.” This
wild and intricate country, with its silent plains and valleys
intersected by mountains, has ever been famous for banditti. It was here
that Omar Ibn Hassan, a robber-chief among the Moslems, held ruthless
sway in the ninth century, disputing dominion even with the caliphs of
Cordova. This too was a part of the regions so often ravaged during the
reign of Ferdinand and Isabella by Ali Atar, the old Moorish alcayde of
Loxa, father-in-law of Boabdil, so that it was called Ali Atar’s garden,
and here “Jose Maria,” famous in Spanish brigand story, had his favorite
lurking-places.

In the course of the day we passed through Fuente la Piedra, near a
little salt lake of the same name, a beautiful sheet of water,
reflecting like a mirror the distant mountains. We now came in sight of
Antiquera, that old city of warlike reputation, lying in the lap of the
great sierra which runs through Andalusia. A noble Vega spread out
before it, a picture of mild fertility set in a frame of rocky
mountains. Crossing a gentle river we approached the city between hedges
and gardens, in which nightingales were pouring forth their evening
song. About nightfall we arrived at the gates. Everything in this
venerable city has a decidedly Spanish stamp. It lies too much out of
the frequented track of foreign travel to have its old usages trampled
out. Here I observed old men still wearing the montero, or ancient
hunting-cap, once common throughout Spain; while the young men wore the
little round-crowned hat, with brim turned up all round, like a cup
turned down in its saucer; while the brim was set off with little black
tufts like cockades. The women, too, were all in mantillas and
basquinas. The fashions of Paris had not reached Antiquera.

Pursuing our course through a spacious street, we put up at the posada
of San Fernando. As Antiquera, though a considerable city, is, as I
observed, somewhat out of the track of travel, I had anticipated bad
quarters and poor fare at the inn. I was agreeably disappointed,
therefore, by a supper-table amply supplied, and what were still more
acceptable, good clean rooms and comfortable beds. Our man Sancho felt
himself as well off as his namesake when he had the run of the duke’s
kitchen, and let me know, as I retired for the night, that it had been a
proud time for the alforjas.

Early in the morning (May 4th) I strolled to the ruins of the old
Moorish castle, which itself had been reared on the ruins of a Roman
fortress. Here, taking my seat on the remains of a crumbling tower, I
enjoyed a grand and varied landscape, beautiful in itself, and full of
storied and romantic associations; for I was now in the very heart of
the country famous for the chivalrous contests between Moor and
Christian. Below me, in its lap of hills, lay the old warrior city so
often mentioned in chronicle and ballad. Out of yon gate and down yon
hill paraded the band of Spanish cavaliers, of highest rank and bravest
bearing, to make that foray during the war and conquest of Granada,
which ended in the lamentable massacre among the mountains of Malaga,
and laid all Andalusia in mourning. Beyond spread out the Vega, covered
with gardens and orchards and fields of grain and enamelled meadows,
inferior only to the famous Vega of Granada. To the right the Rock of
the Lovers stretched like a cragged promontory into the plain, whence
the daughter of the Moorish alcayde and her lover, when closely
pursued, threw themselves in despair.

The matin peal from church and convent below me rang sweetly in the
morning air, as I descended. The market-place was beginning to throng
with the populace, who traffic in the abundant produce of the vega; for
this is the mart of an agricultural region. In the market-place were
abundance of freshly plucked roses for sale; for not a dame or damsel of
Andalusia thinks her gala dress complete without a rose shining like a
gem among her raven tresses.

On returning to the inn I found our man Sancho in high gossip with the
landlord and two or three of his hangers-on. He had just been telling
some marvellous story about Seville, which mine host seemed piqued to
match with one equally marvellous about Antiquera. There was once a
fountain, he said, in one of the public squares, called _Il fuente del
toro_, (the fountain of the bull,) because the water gushed from the
mouth of a bull’s head, carved of stone. Underneath the head was
inscribed,--

    En frente del toro
    Se hallen tesoro.

(In front of the bull there is treasure.) Many digged in front of the
fountain, but lost their labor and found no money. At last one knowing
fellow construed the motto a different way. It is in the forehead
(frente) of the bull that the treasure is to be found, said he to
himself, and I am the man to find it. Accordingly he came, late at
night, with a mallet, and knocked the head to pieces; and what do you
think he found?

“Plenty of gold and diamonds!” cried Sancho eagerly.

“He found nothing,” rejoined mine host, dryly, “and he ruined the
fountain.”

Here a great laugh was set up by the landlord’s hangers-on; who
considered Sancho completely taken in by what I presume was one of mine
host’s standing jokes.

Leaving Antiquera at eight o’clock, we had a delightful ride along the
little river, and by gardens and orchards fragrant with the odors of
spring and vocal with the nightingale. Our road passed round the Rock of
the Lovers (el peñon de los enamorados), which rose in a precipice above
us. In the course of the morning we passed through Archidona, situated
in the breast of a high hill, with a three-pointed mountain towering
above it, and the ruins of a Moorish fortress. It was a great toil to
ascend a steep stony street leading up into the city, although it bore
the encouraging name of Calle Real del Llano (the royal street of the
plain), but it was still a greater toil to descend from this mountain
city on the other side.

At noon we halted in sight of Archidona, in a pleasant little meadow
among hills covered with olive-trees. Our cloaks were spread on the
grass, under an elm by the side of a bubbling rivulet; our horses were
tethered where they might crop the herbage, and Sancho was told to
produce his alforjas. He had been unusually silent this morning ever
since the laugh raised at his expense, but now his countenance
brightened, and he produced his alforjas with an air of triumph. They
contained the contributions of four days’ journeying, but had been
signally enriched by the foraging of the previous evening in the
plenteous inn at Antiquera; and this seemed to furnish him with a
set-off to the banter of mine host.

    En frente del toro
    Se hallen tesoro

would he exclaim, with a chuckling laugh, as he drew forth the
heterogeneous contents one by one, in a series which seemed to have no
end. First came forth a shoulder of roasted kid, very little the worse
for wear; then an entire partridge; then a great morsel of salted
codfish wrapped in paper; then the residue of a ham; then the half of a
pullet, together with several rolls of bread, and a rabble rout of
oranges, figs, raisins, and walnuts. His bota also had been recruited
with some excellent wine of Malaga. At every fresh apparition from his
larder, he would enjoy our ludicrous surprise, throwing himself back on
the grass, shouting with laughter, and exclaiming, “Frente del
toro!--frente del toro! Ah, Señors, they thought Sancho a simpleton at
Antiquera; but Sancho knew where to find the _tesoro_.”

While we were diverting ourselves with his simple drollery, a solitary
beggar approached, who had almost the look of a pilgrim. He had a
venerable gray beard, and was evidently very old, supporting himself on
a staff, yet age had not bowed him down; he was tall and erect, and had
the wreck of a fine form. He wore a round Andalusian hat, a sheep-skin
jacket, and leathern breeches, gaiters, and sandals. His dress, though
old and patched, was decent, his demeanor manly, and he addressed us
with the grave courtesy that is to be remarked in the lowest Spaniard.
We were in a favorable mood for such a visitor; and in a freak of
capricious charity gave him some silver, a loaf of fine wheaten bread,
and a goblet of our choice wine of Malaga. He received them thankfully,
but without any grovelling tribute of gratitude. Tasting the wine, he
held it up to the light, with a slight beam of surprise in his eye; then
quaffing it off at a draught, “It is many years,” said he, “since I have
tasted such wine. It is a cordial to an old man’s heart.” Then, looking
at the beautiful wheaten loaf, “_bendito sea tal pan!_” “blessed be such
bread!” So saying, he put it in his wallet. We urged him to eat it on
the spot. “No, Señors,” replied he, “the wine I had either to drink or
leave; but the bread I may take home to share with my family.”

Our man Sancho sought our eye, and reading permission there, gave the
old man some of the ample fragments of our repast, on condition,
however, that he should sit down and make a meal.

He accordingly took his seat at some little distance from us, and began
to eat slowly, and with a sobriety and decorum that would have become a
hidalgo. There was altogether a measured manner and a quiet
self-possession about the old man, that made me think that he had seen
better days: his language too, though simple, had occasionally something
picturesque and almost poetical in the phraseology. I set him down for
some broken-down cavalier. I was mistaken; it was nothing but the innate
courtesy of a Spaniard, and the poetical turn of thought and language
often to be found in the lowest classes of this clear-witted people. For
fifty years, he told us, he had been a shepherd, but now he was out of
employ and destitute. “When I was a young man,” said he, “nothing could
harm or trouble me; I was always well, always gay; but now I am
seventy-nine years of age, and a beggar, and my heart begins to fail
me.”

Still he was not a regular mendicant: it was not until recently that
want had driven him to this degradation; and he gave a touching picture
of the struggle between hunger and pride, when abject destitution first
came upon him. He was returning from Malaga without money; he had not
tasted food for some time, and was crossing one of the great plains of
Spain, where there were but few habitations. When almost dead with
hunger, he applied at the door of a venta or country inn. “_Perdón usted
por Dios hermano!_” (Excuse us, brother, for God’s sake!) was the
reply--the usual mode in Spain of refusing a beggar. “I turned away,”
said he, “with shame greater than my hunger, for my heart was yet too
proud. I came to a river with high banks, and deep, rapid current, and
felt tempted to throw myself in: ‘What should such an old, worthless,
wretched man as I live for?’ But when I was on the brink of the current,
I thought on the blessed Virgin, and turned away. I travelled on until I
saw a country-seat at a little distance from the road, and entered the
outer gate of the court-yard. The door was shut, but there were two
young señoras at a window. I approached and begged;--‘_Perdón usted por
Dios hermano!_’--and the window closed. I crept out of the court-yard,
but hunger overcame me, and my heart gave way: I thought my hour at
hand, so I laid myself down at the gate, commended myself to the Holy
Virgin, and covered my head to die. In a little while afterwards the
master of the house came home: seeing me lying at his gate, he uncovered
my head, had pity on my gray hairs, took me into his house, and gave me
food. So, Señors, you see that one should always put confidence in the
protection of the Virgin.”

The old man was on his way to his native place, Archidona, which was in
full view on its steep and rugged mountain. He pointed to the ruins of
its castle. “That castle,” he said, “was inhabited by a Moorish king at
the time of the wars of Granada. Queen Isabella invaded it with a great
army; but the king looked down from his castle among the clouds, and
laughed her to scorn! Upon this the Virgin appeared to the queen, and
guided her and her army up a mysterious path in the mountains, which had
never before been known. When the Moor saw her coming, he was
astonished, and springing with his horse from a precipice, was dashed to
pieces! The marks of his horse’s hoofs,” said the old man, “are to be
seen in the margin of the rock to this day. And see, Señors, yonder is
the road by which the queen and her army mounted: you see it like a
ribbon up the mountain’s side; but the miracle is, that, though it can
be seen at a distance, when you come near it disappears!”

The ideal road to which he pointed was undoubtedly a sandy ravine of the
mountain, which looked narrow and defined at a distance, but became
broad and indistinct on an approach.

As the old man’s heart warmed with wine and wassail, he went on to tell
us a story of the buried treasure left under the castle by the Moorish
king. His own house was next to the foundations of the castle. The
curate and notary dreamed three times of the treasure, and went to work
at the place pointed out in their dreams. His own son-in-law heard the
sound of their pickaxes and spades at night. What they found, nobody
knows; they became suddenly rich, but kept their own secret. Thus the
old man had once been next door to fortune, but was doomed never to get
under the same roof.

I have remarked that the stories of treasure buried by the Moors, so
popular throughout Spain, are most current among the poorest people.
Kind nature consoles with shadows for the lack of substantials. The
thirsty man dreams of fountains and running streams; the hungry man of
banquets; and the poor man of heaps of hidden gold: nothing certainly is
more opulent than the imagination of a beggar.

Our afternoon’s ride took us through a steep and rugged defile of the
mountains, called Puerte del Rey, the Pass of the King; being one of the
great passes into the territories of Granada, and the one by which King
Ferdinand conducted his army. Towards sunset the road, winding round a
hill, brought us in sight of the famous little frontier city of Loxa,
which repulsed Ferdinand from its walls. Its Arabic name implies
guardian, and such it was to the Vega of Granada, being one of its
advanced guards. It was the stronghold of that fiery veteran, old Ali
Atar, father-in-law of Boabdil; and here it was that the latter
collected his troops, and sallied forth on that disastrous foray which
ended in the death of the old alcayde and his own captivity. From its
commanding position at the gate, as it were, of this mountain-pass, Loxa
has not unaptly been termed the key of Granada. It is wildly
picturesque; built along the face of an arid mountain. The ruins of a
Moorish alcazar or citadel crown a rocky mound which rises out of the
centre of the town. The river Xenil washes its base, winding among
rocks, and groves, and gardens, and meadows, and crossed by a Moorish
bridge. Above the city all is savage and sterile, below is the richest
vegetation and the freshest verdure. A similar contrast is presented by
the river: above the bridge it is placid and grassy, reflecting groves
and gardens; below it is rapid, noisy, and tumultuous. The Sierra
Nevada, the royal mountains of Granada, crowned with perpetual snow,
form the distant boundary to this varied landscape, one of the most
characteristic of romantic Spain.

Alighting at the entrance of the city, we gave our horses to Sancho to
lead them to the inn, while we strolled about to enjoy the singular
beauty of the environs. As we crossed the bridge to a fine alameda, or
public walk, the bells tolled the hour of orison. At the sound the
wayfarers, whether on business or pleasure, paused, took off their hats,
crossed themselves, and repeated their evening prayer: a pious custom
still rigidly observed in retired parts of Spain. Altogether it was a
solemn and beautiful evening scene, and we wandered on as the evening
gradually closed, and the new moon began to glitter between the high
elms of the alameda. We were roused from this quiet state of enjoyment
by the voice of our trusty squire hailing us from a distance. He came up
to us, out of breath. “Ah, Señores,” cried he, “el pobre Sancho no es
nada sin Don Quixote.” (Ah, Señors, poor Sancho is nothing without Don
Quixote.) He had been alarmed at our not coming to the inn; Loxa was
such a wild mountain place, full of contrabandistas, enchanters, and
infiernos; he did not well know what might have happened, and set out to
seek us, inquiring after us of every person he met, until he traced us
across the bridge, and, to his great joy, caught sight of us strolling
in the alameda.

The inn to which he conducted us was called the Corona, or Crown, and we
found it quite in keeping with the character of the place, the
inhabitants of which seem still to retain the bold, fiery spirit of the
olden time. The hostess was a young and handsome Andalusian widow, whose
trim basquiña of black silk, fringed with bugles, set off the play of a
graceful form and round pliant limbs. Her step was firm and elastic; her
dark eye was full of fire; and the coquetry of her air, and varied
ornaments of her person, showed that she was accustomed to be admired.

She was well matched by a brother, nearly about her own age; they were
perfect models of the Andalusian Majo and Maja. He was tall, vigorous,
and well-formed, with a clear olive complexion, a dark beaming eye, and
curling chestnut whiskers that met under his chin. He was gallantly
dressed in a short green velvet jacket, fitted to his shape, profusely
decorated with silver buttons, with a white handkerchief in each pocket.
He had breeches of the same, with rows of buttons from the hips to the
knees; a pink silk handkerchief round his neck, gathered through a ring,
on the bosom of a neatly plaited shirt; a sash round the waist to match;
bottinas, or spatter-dashes, of the finest russet leather, elegantly
worked, and open at the calf to show his stocking; and russet shoes,
setting off a well-shaped foot.

As he was standing at the door, a horseman rode up and entered into low
and earnest conversation with him. He was dressed in a similar style,
and almost with equal finery; a man about thirty, square-built, with
strong Roman features, handsome, though slightly pitted with the
small-pox; with a free, bold, and somewhat daring air. His powerful
black horse was decorated with tassels and fanciful trappings, and a
couple of broad-mouthed blunderbusses hung behind the saddle. He had the
air of one of those contrabandistas I have seen in the mountains of
Ronda, and evidently had a good understanding with the brother of mine
hostess; nay, if I mistake not, he was a favored admirer of the widow.
In fact, the whole inn and its inmates had something of a contrabandista
aspect, and a blunderbuss stood in a corner beside the guitar. The
horseman I have mentioned passed his evening in the posada, and sang
several bold mountain romances with great spirit. As we were at supper,
two poor Asturians put in in distress, begging food and a night’s
lodging. They had been waylaid by robbers as they came from a fair among
the mountains, robbed of a horse which carried all their stock in trade,
stripped of their money, and most of their apparel, beaten for having
offered resistance, and left almost naked in the road. My companion,
with a prompt generosity natural to him, ordered them a supper and a
bed, and gave them a sum of money to help them forward towards their
home.

As the evening advanced, the _dramatis personæ_ thickened. A large man,
about sixty years of age, of powerful frame, came strolling in, to
gossip with mine hostess. He was dressed in the ordinary Andalusian
costume, but had a huge sabre tucked under his arm; wore large
moustaches, and had something of a lofty swaggering air. Every one
seemed to regard him with great deference.

Our man Sancho whispered to us that he was Don Ventura Rodriguez, the
hero and champion of Loxa, famous for his prowess and the strength of
his arm. In the time of the French invasion he surprised six troopers
who were asleep; he first secured their horses, then attacked them with
his sabre, killed some, and took the rest prisoners. For this exploit
the king allows him a peseta (the fifth of a duro, or dollar) per day
and has dignified him with the title of Don.

I was amused to behold his swelling language and demeanor. He was
evidently a thorough Andalusian, boastful as brave. His sabre was always
in his hand or under his arm. He carries it always about with him as a
child does its doll, calls it his Santa Teresa, and says, “When I draw
it, the earth trembles” (tiembla la tierra).

I sat until a late hour listening to the varied themes of this motley
group, who mingled together with the unreserve of a Spanish posada. We
had contrabandista songs, stories of robbers, guerrilla exploits, and
Moorish legends. The last were from our handsome landlady, who gave a
poetical account of the infiernos, or infernal regions of Loxa,--dark
caverns, in which subterranean streams and waterfalls make a mysterious
sound. The common people say that there are money-coiners shut up there
from the time of the Moors; and that the Moorish kings kept their
treasures in those caverns.

I retired to bed with my imagination excited by all that I had seen and
heard in this old warrior city. Scarce had I fallen asleep when I was
aroused by a horrid din and uproar, that might have confounded the hero
of La Mancha himself, whose experience of Spanish inns was a continual
uproar. It seemed for a moment as if the Moors were once more breaking
into the town; or the infiernos of which mine hostess talked had broken
loose. I sallied forth, half dressed, to reconnoitre. It was nothing
more nor less than a charivari to celebrate the nuptials of an old man
with a buxom damsel. Wishing him joy of his bride and his serenade, I
returned to my more quiet bed, and slept soundly until morning.

While dressing, I amused myself in reconnoitring the populace from my
window. There were groups of fine-looking young men in the trim fanciful
Andalusian costume, with brown cloaks, thrown about them in true Spanish
style, which cannot be imitated, and little round majo hats stuck on
with a peculiar knowing air. They had the same galliard look which I
have remarked among the dandy mountaineers of Ronda. Indeed, all this
part of Andalusia abounds with such game-looking characters. They loiter
about the towns and villages; seem to have plenty of time and plenty of
money; “horse to ride and weapon to wear.” Great gossips, great smokers,
apt at touching the guitar, singing couplets to their maja belles, and
famous dancers of the bolero. Throughout all Spain the men, however
poor, have a gentlemanlike abundance of leisure; seeming to consider it
the attribute of a true cavaliero never to be in a hurry; but the
Andalusians are gay as well as leisurely, and have none of the squalid
accompaniments of idleness. The adventurous contraband trade which
prevails throughout these mountain regions, and along the maritime
borders of Andalusia, is doubtless at the bottom of this galliard
character.

In contrast to the costume of these groups was that of two long-legged
Valencians conducting a donkey, laden with articles of merchandise;
their musket slung crosswise over his back, ready for action. They wore
round jackets (jalecos), wide linen bragas or drawers scarce reaching to
the knees and looking like kilts, red fajas or sashes swathed tightly
round their waists, sandals of espartal or bass weed, colored kerchiefs
round their heads somewhat in the style of turbans, but leaving the top
of the head uncovered; in short, their whole appearance having much of
the traditional Moorish stamp.

On leaving Loxa we were joined by a cavalier, well-mounted and
well-armed, and followed on foot by an escopetero or musketeer. He
saluted us courteously, and soon let us into his quality. He was chief
of the customs, or rather, I should suppose, chief of an armed company
whose business it is to patrol the roads and look out for
contrabandistas. The escopetero was one of his guards. In the course of
our morning’s ride I drew from him some particulars concerning the
smugglers, who have risen to be a kind of mongrel chivalry in Spain.
They come into Andalusia, he said, from various parts, but especially
from La Mancha; sometimes to receive goods, to be smuggled on an
appointed night across the line at the plaza or strand of Gibraltar;
sometimes to meet a vessel, which is to hover on a given night off a
certain part of the coast. They keep together and travel in the night.
In the daytime they lie quiet in barrancos, gullies of the mountains, or
lonely farm-houses; where they are generally well received, as they make
the family liberal presents of their smuggled wares. Indeed, much of the
finery and trinkets worn by the wives and daughters of the mountain
hamlets and farm-houses are presents from the gay and open-handed
contrabandistas.

Arrived at the part of the coast where a vessel is to meet them, they
look out at night from some rocky point or headland. If they descry a
sail near the shore they make a concerted signal; sometimes it consists
in suddenly displaying a lantern three times from beneath the folds of a
cloak. If the signal is answered, they descend to the shore and prepare
for quick work. The vessel runs close in; all her boats are busy landing
the smuggled goods, made up into snug packages for transportation on
horseback. These are hastily thrown on the beach, as hastily gathered
up and packed on the horses, and then the contrabandistas clatter off to
the mountains. They travel by the roughest, wildest, and most solitary
roads, where it is almost fruitless to pursue them. The custom-house
guards do not attempt it: they take a different course. When they hear
of one of these bands returning full freighted through the mountains,
they go out in force, sometimes twelve infantry and eight horsemen, and
take their station where the mountain defile opens into the plain. The
infantry, who lie in ambush some distance within the defile, suffer the
band to pass, then rise and fire upon them. The contrabandistas dash
forward, but are met in front by the horsemen. A wild skirmish ensues.
The contrabandistas, if hard pressed, become desperate. Some dismount,
use their horses as breastworks, and fire over their backs; others cut
the cords, let the packs fall off to delay the enemy, and endeavor to
escape with their steeds. Some get off in this way with the loss of
their packages; some are taken, horses, packages, and all; others
abandon everything, and make their escape by scrambling up the
mountains. “And then,” cried Sancho, who had been listening with a
greedy ear, “_se hacen ladrones legítimos_,”--and then they become
legitimate robbers.

I could not help laughing at Sancho’s idea of a legitimate calling of
the kind; but the chief of customs told me it was really the case that
the smugglers, when thus reduced to extremity, thought they had a kind
of right to take the road, and lay travellers under contribution, until
they had collected funds enough to mount and equip themselves in
contrabandista style.

Towards noon our wayfaring companion took leave of us and turned up a
steep defile, followed by his escopetero; and shortly afterwards we
emerged from the mountains, and entered upon the far-famed Vega of
Granada.

Our last mid-day’s repast was taken under a grove of olive-trees on the
border of a rivulet. We were in a classical neighborhood; for not far
off were the groves and orchards of the Soto de Roma. This, according to
fabulous tradition, was a retreat founded by Count Julian to console his
daughter Florinda. It was a rural resort of the Moorish kings of
Granada; and has in modern times been granted to the Duke of Wellington.

Our worthy squire made a half melancholy face as he drew forth, for the
last time, the contents of his alforjas, lamenting that our expedition
was drawing to a close, for, with such cavaliers, he said, he could
travel to the world’s end. Our repast, however, was a gay one; made
under such delightful auspices. The day was without a cloud. The heat of
the sun was tempered by cool breezes from the mountains. Before us
extended the glorious Vega. In the distance was romantic Granada
surmounted by the ruddy towers of the Alhambra, while far above it the
snowy summits of the Sierra Nevada shone like silver.

Our repast finished, we spread our cloaks and took our last siesta _al
fresco_, lulled by the humming of bees among the flowers and the notes
of doves among the olive-trees. When the sultry hours were passed we
resumed our journey. After a time we overtook a pursy little man shaped
not unlike a toad and mounted on a mule. He fell into conversation with
Sancho, and finding we were strangers, undertook to guide us to a good
posada. He was an escribano (notary), he said, and knew the city as
thoroughly as his own pocket. “Ah Dios, Señores! what a city you are
going to see. Such streets! such squares! such palaces! and then the
women--ah Santa Maria purísima--what women!”--“But the posada you talk
of,” said I, “are you sure it is a good one?”

“Good! Santa Maria! the best in Granada. Salones grandes--camas de
luxo--colchones de pluma (grand saloons--luxurious sleeping-rooms--beds
of down). Ah, Señores, you will fare like King Chico in the Alhambra.”

“And how will my horses fare?” cried Sancho.

“Like King Chico’s horses. _Chocolate con leche y bollos para almuerza_”
(chocolate and milk with sugar cakes for breakfast), giving the squire a
knowing wink and a leer.

After such satisfactory accounts, nothing more was to be desired on that
head. So we rode quietly on, the squab little notary taking the lead,
and turning to us every moment with some fresh exclamation about the
grandeurs of Granada and the famous times we were to have at the posada.

Thus escorted, we passed between hedges of aloes and Indian figs, and
through that wilderness of gardens with which the Vega is embroidered,
and arrived about sunset at the gates of the city. Our officious little
conductor conveyed us up one street and down another, until he rode into
the court-yard of an inn where he appeared to be perfectly at home.
Summoning the landlord by his Christian name, he committed us to his
care as two cavalleros de mucho valor, worthy of his best apartments and
most sumptuous fare. We were instantly reminded of the patronizing
stranger who introduced Gil Blas with such a flourish of trumpets to the
host and hostess of the inn at Pennaflor, ordering trouts for his supper
and eating voraciously at his expense. “You know not what you possess,”
cried he to the innkeeper and his wife. “You have a treasure in your
house. Behold in this young gentleman the eighth wonder of the
world--nothing in this house is too good for Señor Gil Blas of
Santillane, who deserves to be entertained like a prince.”

Determined that the little notary should not eat trouts at our expense,
like his prototype of Pennaflor, we forbore to ask him to supper; nor
had we reason to reproach ourselves with ingratitude, for we found
before morning the little varlet, who was no doubt a good friend of the
landlord, had decoyed us into one of the shabbiest posadas in Granada.




PALACE OF THE ALHAMBRA


To the traveller imbued with a feeling for the historical and poetical,
so inseparably intertwined in the annals of romantic Spain, the Alhambra
is as much an object of devotion as is the Caaba to all true Moslems.
How many legends and traditions, true and fabulous,--how many songs and
ballads, Arabian and Spanish, of love and war and chivalry, are
associated with this Oriental pile! It was the royal abode of the
Moorish kings, where, surrounded with the splendors and refinements of
Asiatic luxury, they held dominion over what they vaunted as a
terrestrial paradise, and made their last stand for empire in Spain. The
royal palace forms but a part of a fortress, the walls of which, studded
with towers, stretch irregularly round the whole crest of a hill, a spur
of the Sierra Nevada or Snowy Mountains, and overlook the city;
externally it is a rude congregation of towers and battlements, with no
regularity of plan nor grace of architecture, and giving little promise
of the grace and beauty which prevail within.

In the time of the Moors the fortress was capable of containing within
its outward precincts an army of forty thousand men, and served
occasionally as a stronghold of the sovereigns against their rebellious
subjects. After the kingdom had passed into the hands of the Christians,
the Alhambra continued to be a royal demesne, and was occasionally
inhabited by the Castilian monarchs. The emperor Charles V. commenced a
sumptuous palace within its walls, but was deterred from completing it
by repeated shocks of earthquakes. The last royal residents were Philip
V. and his beautiful queen, Elizabetta of Parma, early in the eighteenth
century. Great preparations were made for their reception. The palace
and gardens were placed in a state of repair, and a new suite of
apartments erected, and decorated by artists brought from Italy. The
sojourn of the sovereigns was transient, and after their departure the
palace once more became desolate. Still the place was maintained with
some military state. The governor held it immediately from the crown,
its jurisdiction extended down into the suburbs of the city, and was
independent of the captain-general of Granada. A considerable garrison
was kept up; the governor had his apartments in the front of the old
Moorish palace, and never descended into Granada without some military
parade. The fortress, in fact, was a little town of itself, having
several streets of houses within its walls, together with a Franciscan
convent and a parochial church.

The desertion of the court, however, was a fatal blow to the Alhambra.
Its beautiful halls became desolate, and some of them fell to ruin; the
gardens were destroyed, and the fountains ceased to play. By degrees the
dwellings became filled with a loose and lawless population;
contrabandistas, who availed themselves of its independent jurisdiction
to carry on a wide and daring course of smuggling, and thieves and
rogues of all sorts, who made this their place of refuge whence they
might depredate upon Granada and its vicinity. The strong arm of
government at length interfered; the whole community was thoroughly
sifted; none were suffered to remain but such as were of honest
character, and had legitimate right to a residence; the greater part of
the houses were demolished and a mere hamlet left, with the parochial
church and the Franciscan convent. During the recent troubles in Spain,
when Granada was in the hands of the French, the Alhambra was garrisoned
by their troops, and the palace was occasionally inhabited by the French
commander. With that enlightened taste which has ever distinguished the
French nation in their conquests, this monument of Moorish elegance and
grandeur was rescued from the absolute ruin and desolation that were
overwhelming it. The roofs were repaired, the saloons and galleries
protected from the weather, the gardens cultivated, the watercourses
restored, the fountains once more made to throw up their sparkling
showers; and Spain may thank her invaders for having preserved to her
the most beautiful and interesting of her historical monuments.

On the departure of the French they blew up several towers of the outer
wall, and left the fortifications scarcely tenable. Since that time the
military importance of the post is at an end. The garrison is a handful
of invalid soldiers, whose principal duty is to guard some of the outer
towers, which serve occasionally as a prison of state; and the governor,
abandoning the lofty hill of the Alhambra, resides in the centre of
Granada, for the more convenient dispatch of his official duties. I
cannot conclude this brief notice of the state of the fortress without
bearing testimony to the honorable exertions of its present commander,
Don Francisco de Serna, who is tasking all the limited resources at his
command to put the palace in a state of repair, and by his judicious
precautions has for some time arrested its too certain decay. Had his
predecessors discharged the duties of their station with equal fidelity,
the Alhambra might yet have remained in almost its pristine beauty; were
government to second him with means equal to his zeal, this relic of it
might still be preserved for many generations to adorn the land, and
attract the curious and enlightened of every clime.

Our first object of course, on the morning after our arrival, was a
visit to this time-honored edifice; it has been so often, however, and
so minutely described by travellers, that I shall not undertake to give
a comprehensive and elaborate account of it, but merely occasional
sketches of parts, with the incidents and associations connected with
them.

Leaving our posada, and traversing the renowned square of the
Vivarrambla, once the scene of Moorish jousts and tournaments, now a
crowded market-place, we proceeded along the Zacatin, the main street of
what, in the time of the Moors, was the Great Bazaar, and where small
shops and narrow alleys still retain the Oriental character. Crossing an
open place in front of the palace of the captain-general, we ascended a
confined and winding street, the name of which reminded us of the
chivalric days of Granada. It is called the Calle, or street of the
Gomeres, from a Moorish family famous in chronicle and song. This street
led up to the Puerta de las Granadas, a massive gateway of Grecian
architecture, built by Charles V., forming the entrance to the domains
of the Alhambra.

At the gate were two or three ragged superannuated soldiers, dozing on a
stone bench, the successors of the Zegris and the Abencerrages; while a
tall, meagre varlet, whose rusty-brown cloak was evidently intended to
conceal the ragged state of his nether garments, was lounging in the
sunshine and gossiping with an ancient sentinel on duty. He joined us as
we entered the gate, and offered his services to show us the fortress.

I have a traveller’s dislike to officious ciceroni, and did not
altogether like the garb of the applicant.

“You are well acquainted with the place, I presume?”

“Ninguno mas; pues, Señor, soy hijo de la Alhambra.” (Nobody better; in
fact, sir, I am a son of the Alhambra!)

The common Spaniards have certainly a most poetical way of expressing
themselves. “A son of the Alhambra!” the appellation caught me at once;
the very tattered garb of my new acquaintance assumed a dignity in my
eyes. It was emblematic of the fortunes of the place, and befitted the
progeny of a ruin.

I put some further questions to him, and found that his title was
legitimate. His family had lived in the fortress from generation to
generation ever since the time of the Conquest. His name was Mateo
Ximenes. “Then, perhaps,” said I, “you may be a descendant from the
great Cardinal Ximenes?”--“Dios Sabe! God knows, Señor! It may be so. We
are the oldest family in the Alhambra,--_Christianos Viejos_, old
Christians, without any taint of Moor or Jew. I know we belong to some
great family or other, but I forget whom. My father knows all about it:
he has the coat of arms hanging up in his cottage, up in the fortress.”
There is not any Spaniard, however poor, but has some claim to high
pedigree. The first title of this ragged worthy, however, had completely
captivated me; so I gladly accepted the services of the “son of the
Alhambra.”

We now found ourselves in a deep narrow ravine, filled with beautiful
groves, with a steep avenue, and various footpaths winding through it,
bordered with stone seats, and ornamented with fountains. To our left we
beheld the towers of the Alhambra beetling above us; to our right, on
the opposite side of the ravine, we were equally dominated by rival
towers on a rocky eminence. These, we were told, were the Torres
Vermejos, or vermilion towers, so called from their ruddy hue. No one
knows their origin. They are of a date much anterior to the Alhambra;
some suppose them to have been built by the Romans; others, by some
wandering colony of Phœnicians. Ascending the steep and shady avenue,
we arrived at the foot of a huge square Moorish tower, forming a kind of
barbican, through which passed the main entrance to the fortress. Within
the barbican was another group of veteran invalids, one mounting guard
at the portal, while the rest, wrapped in their tattered cloaks, slept
on the stone benches. This portal is called the Gate of Justice, from
the tribunal held within its porch during the Moslem domination, for the
immediate trial of petty causes: a custom common to the Oriental
nations, and occasionally alluded to in the Sacred Scriptures. “Judges
and officers shalt thou make thee _in all thy gates_, and they shall
judge the people with just judgment.”

The great vestibule, or porch of the gate, is formed by an immense
Arabian arch, of the horseshoe form, which springs to half the height of
the tower. On the keystone of this arch is engraven a gigantic hand.
Within the vestibule, on the keystone of the portal, is sculptured, in
like manner, a gigantic key. Those who pretend to some knowledge of
Mohammedan symbols, affirm that the hand is the emblem of doctrine, the
five fingers designating the five principal commandments of the creed of
Islam, fasting, pilgrimage, alms-giving, ablution, and war against
infidels. The key, say they, is the emblem of the faith or of power; the
key of Daoud, or David, transmitted to the prophet. “And the key of the
house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open and none
shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open.” (Isaiah xxii. 22.)
The key we are told was emblazoned on the standard of the Moslems in
opposition to the Christian emblem of the cross, when they subdued Spain
or Andalusia. It betokened the conquering power invested in the prophet.
“He that hath the key of David, he that openeth and no man shutteth;
and shutteth and no man openeth.” (Rev. iii. 7.)

A different explanation of these emblems, however, was given by the
legitimate son of the Alhambra, and one more in unison with the notions
of the common people, who attach something of mystery and magic to
everything Moorish, and have all kinds of superstitions connected with
this old Moslem fortress. According to Mateo, it was a tradition handed
down from the oldest inhabitants, and which he had from his father and
grandfather, that the hand and key were magical devices on which the
fate of the Alhambra depended. The Moorish king who built it was a great
magician, or, as some believed, had sold himself to the devil, and had
laid the whole fortress under a magic spell. By this means it had
remained standing for several years, in defiance of storms and
earthquakes, while almost all other buildings of the Moors had fallen to
ruin and disappeared. This spell, the tradition went on to say, would
last until the hand on the outer arch should reach down and grasp the
key, when the whole pile would tumble to pieces, and all the treasures
buried beneath it by the Moors would be revealed.

Notwithstanding this ominous prediction, we ventured to pass through the
spell-bound gateway, feeling some little assurance against magic art in
the protection of the Virgin, a statue of whom we observed above the
portal.

After passing through the barbican, we ascended a narrow lane, winding
between walls, and came on an open esplanade within the fortress, called
the Plaza de los Algibes, or Place of the Cisterns, from great
reservoirs which undermine it, cut in the living rock by the Moors to
receive the water brought by conduits from the Darro, for the supply of
the fortress. Here, also, is a well of immense depth, furnishing the
purest and coldest of water,--another monument of the delicate taste of
the Moors, who were indefatigable in their exertions to obtain that
element in its crystal purity.

In front of this esplanade is the splendid pile commenced by Charles V.,
and intended, it is said, to eclipse the residence of the Moorish kings.
Much of the Oriental edifice intended for the winter season was
demolished to make way for this massive pile. The grand entrance was
blocked up; so that the present entrance to the Moorish palace is
through a simple and almost humble portal in a corner. With all the
massive grandeur and architectural merit of the palace of Charles V., we
regarded it as an arrogant intruder, and passing by it with a feeling
almost of scorn, rang at the Moslem portal.

While waiting for admittance, our self-imposed cicerone, Mateo Ximenes,
informed us that the royal palace was intrusted to the care of a worthy
old maiden dame called Doña Antonia-Molina, but who, according to
Spanish custom, went by the more neighborly appellation of Tia Antonia
(Aunt Antonia), who maintained the Moorish halls and gardens in order
and showed them to strangers. While we were talking, the door was opened
by a plump little black-eyed Andalusian damsel, whom Mateo addressed as
Dolores, but who from her bright looks and cheerful disposition
evidently merited a merrier name. Mateo informed me in a whisper that
she was the niece of Tia Antonia, and I found she was the good fairy who
was to conduct us through the enchanted palace. Under her guidance we
crossed the threshold, and were at once transported, as if by magic
wand, into other times and an Oriental realm, and were treading the
scenes of Arabian story. Nothing could be in greater contrast than the
unpromising exterior of the pile with the scene now before us. We found
ourselves in a vast patio or court, one hundred and fifty feet in
length, and upwards of eighty feet in breadth, paved with white marble,
and decorated at each end with light Moorish peristyles, one of which
supported an elegant gallery of fretted architecture. Along the
mouldings of the cornices and on various parts of the walls were
escutcheons and ciphers, and cufic and Arabic characters in high relief,
repeating the pious mottoes of the Moslem monarchs, the builders of the
Alhambra, or extolling their grandeur and munificence. Along the centre
of the court extended an immense basin or tank (estanque), a hundred and
twenty-four feet in length, twenty-seven in breadth, and five in depth,
receiving its water from two marble vases. Hence it is called the Court
of the Alberca (from al Beerkah, the Arabic for a pond or tank). Great
numbers of gold-fish were to be seen gleaming through the waters of the
basin, and it was bordered by hedges of roses.

Passing from the Court of the Alberca under a Moorish archway, we
entered the renowned Court of Lions. No part of the edifice gives a more
complete idea of its original beauty than this, for none has suffered so
little from the ravages of time. In the centre stands the fountain
famous in song and story. The alabaster basins still shed their diamond
drops; the twelve lions which support them, and give the court its name,
still cast forth crystal streams as in the days of Boabdil. The lions,
however, are unworthy of their fame, being of miserable sculpture, the
work probably of some Christian captive. The court is laid out in
flower-beds, instead of its ancient and appropriate pavement of tiles or
marble; the alteration, an instance of bad taste, was made by the French
when in possession of Granada. Round the four sides of the court are
light Arabian arcades of open filigree work, supported by slender
pillars of white marble, which it is supposed were originally gilded.
The architecture, like that in most parts of the interior of the palace,
is characterized by elegance rather than grandeur, bespeaking a
delicate and graceful taste, and a disposition to indolent enjoyment.
When one looks upon the fairy traces of the peristyles, and the
apparently fragile fretwork of the walls, it is difficult to believe
that so much has survived the wear and tear of centuries, the shocks of
earthquakes, the violence of war, and the quiet, though no less baneful,
pilferings of the tasteful traveller: it is almost sufficient to excuse
the popular tradition, that the whole is protected by a magic charm.

On one side of the court a rich portal opens into the Hall of the
Abencerrages: so called from the gallant cavaliers of that illustrious
line who were here perfidiously massacred. There are some who doubt the
whole story, but our humble cicerone Mateo pointed out the very wicket
of the portal through which they were introduced one by one into the
Court of Lions, and the white marble fountain in the centre of the hall
beside which they were beheaded. He showed us also certain broad ruddy
stains on the pavement, traces of their blood, which, according to
popular belief, can never be effaced.

Finding we listened to him apparently with easy faith, he added, that
there was often heard at night, in the Court of Lions, a low confused
sound, resembling the murmuring of a multitude; and now and then a faint
tinkling, like the distant clank of chains. These sounds were made by
the spirits of the murdered Abencerrages; who nightly haunt the scene of
their suffering and invoke the vengeance of Heaven on their destroyer.

The sounds in question had no doubt been produced, as I had afterwards
an opportunity of ascertaining, by the bubbling currents and tinkling
falls of water conducted under the pavement through pipes and channels
to supply the fountains; but I was too considerate to intimate such an
idea to the humble chronicler of the Alhambra.

Encouraged by my easy credulity, Mateo gave me the following as an
undoubted fact, which he had from his grandfather:--

There was once an invalid soldier, who had charge of the Alhambra to
show it to strangers; as he was one evening, about twilight, passing
through the Court of Lions, he heard footsteps on the Hall of the
Abencerrages; supposing some strangers to be lingering there, he
advanced to attend upon them, when to his astonishment he beheld four
Moors richly dressed, with gilded cuirasses and cimeters, and poniards
glittering with precious stones. They were walking to and fro, with
solemn pace; but paused and beckoned to him. The old soldier, however,
took to flight, and could never afterwards be prevailed upon to enter
the Alhambra. Thus it is that men sometimes turn their backs upon
fortune; for it is the firm opinion of Mateo, that the Moors intended to
reveal the place where their treasures lay buried. A successor to the
invalid soldier was more knowing; he came to the Alhambra poor; but at
the end of a year went off to Malaga, bought houses, set up a carriage,
and still lives there, one of the richest as well as oldest men of the
place; all which, Mateo sagely surmised, was in consequence of his
finding out the golden secret of these phantom Moors.

I now perceived I had made an invaluable acquaintance in this son of the
Alhambra, one who knew all the apocryphal history of the place, and
firmly believed in it, and whose memory was stuffed with a kind of
knowledge for which I have a lurking fancy, but which is too apt to be
considered rubbish by less indulgent philosophers. I determined to
cultivate the acquaintance of this learned Theban.

Immediately opposite the Hall of the Abencerrages, a portal, richly
adorned, leads into a hall of less tragical associations. It is light
and lofty, exquisitely graceful in its architecture, paved with white
marble, and bears the suggestive name of the Hall of the Two Sisters.
Some destroy the romance of the name by attributing it to two enormous
slabs of alabaster which lie side by side, and form a great part of the
pavement: an opinion strongly supported by Mateo Ximenes. Others are
disposed to give the name a more poetical significance, as the vague
memorial of Moorish beauties who once graced this hall, which was
evidently a part of the royal harem. This opinion I was happy to find
entertained by our little bright-eyed guide, Dolores, who pointed to a
balcony over an inner porch; which gallery, she had been told, belonged
to the women’s apartment. “You see, Señor,” said she, “it is all grated
and latticed, like the gallery in a convent chapel where the nuns hear
mass; for the Moorish kings,” added she, indignantly, “shut up their
wives just like nuns.”

The latticed “jalousies,” in fact, still remain, whence the dark-eyed
beauties of the harem might gaze unseen upon the zambras and other
dances and entertainments of the hall below.

On each side of this hall are recesses or alcoves for ottomans and
couches, on which the voluptuous lords of the Alhambra indulged in that
dreamy repose so dear to the Orientalists. A cupola or lantern admits a
tempered light from above and a free circulation of air; while on one
side is heard the refreshing sound of waters from the fountain of the
lions, and on the other side the soft plash from the basin in the garden
of Lindaraxa.

It is impossible to contemplate this scene, so perfectly Oriental,
without feeling the early associations of Arabian romance, and almost
expecting to see the white arm of some mysterious princess beckoning
from the gallery, or some dark eye sparkling through the lattice. The
abode of beauty is here as if it had been inhabited but yesterday; but
where are the two sisters, where the Zoraydas and Lindaraxas!

An abundant supply of water, brought from the mountains by old Moorish
aqueducts, circulates throughout the palace, supplying its baths and
fish-pools, sparkling in jets within its halls, or murmuring in channels
along the marble pavements. When it has paid its tribute to the royal
pile, and visited its gardens and parterres, it flows down the long
avenue leading to the city, tinkling in rills, gushing in fountains, and
maintaining a perpetual verdure in those groves that embower and
beautify the whole hill of the Alhambra.

Those only who have sojourned in the ardent climates of the South can
appreciate the delights of an abode combining the breezy coolness of the
mountain with the freshness and verdure of the valley. While the city
below pants with the noontide heat, and the parched Vega trembles to the
eye, the delicate airs from the Sierra Nevada play through these lofty
halls, bringing with them the sweetness of the surrounding gardens.
Everything invites to that indolent repose, the bliss of southern
climes; and while the half-shut eye looks out from shaded balconies upon
the glittering landscape, the ear is lulled by the rustling of groves
and the murmur of running streams.

I forbear for the present, however, to describe the other delightful
apartments of the palace. My object is merely to give the reader a
general introduction into an abode where, if so disposed, he may linger
and loiter with me day by day until we gradually become familiar with
all its localities.
