I went to the Havana in the summer of 182 — , on business, and having settled it to my satisfaction, engaged my passage in a vessel bound to New York — We had been but a few hours on the voyage when I felt that weariness and pain which indicates the approach of the yellow fever. I continued to grow worse, and to add to my distress, the vessel began to roll violently and sea-sickness with all its horrors came upon me — I would have sacrificed every thing for a quiet place, in which to die, as I felt that this was all I could wish for. Overcome at length with weakness, and completely exhausted, I fell asleep, from which I was awakened by a confused noise. I at first believed it was merely imagination, but as it became louder, I felt convinced that what I heard was a reality. At length the cabin door opened, and several persons descended. Our captain approached my birth and told me the vessel had been captured by pirates, and that we were now standing in for the land. I heard the first part of his speech with an apathy which my illness only can account for; — but the very name of land seemed to operate like a charm upon me. A young man now approached and told me to be under no apprehension, as no personal injury was intended, and that every care should be bestowed upon me. He inquired the nature and state of my disease, and brought me a cordial, which considerably relived me. In a short time we were at anchor, and I was told our vessel world be detained for a day or two and after a few articles had been taken out, permitted to proceed on her voyage. The same person subsequently entered, and observed that I could be much better attended on shore, where I would be relieved from the bustle and confusion of the vessel. To this I cheerfully assented, and in the afternoon I was placed in a boat and carried to a hut near the beach; — here I was treated kindly, and every attention paid me. I had been three days on shore when the young man [page 56:] (whom I now discovered to be captain of the corsair) arrived, and told me our vessel would sail in an hour and if I wished to proceed in her I was at liberty to do so, although he remarked, in my present state it would no doubt cost me my life: — and that if I would trust to him, and could bear the detention of a month or so, he would convey me to some part of Cuba, from whence I could easily procure a passage home. Believing a removal in my present state would be almost certain death, added to a strong desire to know more of a man who appeared so different from what I had heard of men engaged in the profession with which he was connected, made me assent to his proposal. In about a week I was decidedly convalescent, and I felt really grateful for the kindness of the youthful outlaw. One evening on entering my room he expressed himself gratified to see me so much recovered, as he was to sail in the morning for the other side of the islands, and it was his wish that should accompany him, as it was likely he would fall in with some vessel bound to the United States, and I could thus get home — the next morning we were underweigh.

It was near midnight when I was awakened by a deep groan in the cabin in which I slept — I raised my head and perceived the captain grin on a small but beautiful dagger, which he was holding to the light as if to see more plainly — before him on the table, as well as I could judge, lay a miniature-he was in tears, and appeared much affected — In a few moments he placed them in hi; desk and went on dock. l mused elute time on the singularity of this man, who seemed fitted for a situation better than that of a piratical captain; — he was rather small in his person, hatippli formed — had been handsome, I should think, but sorrow seemed to have set her seal upon his brow; his hair exhibited the marts of premature old age, although he could not be more than twenty-three.

The next night I determined to watch and see if he would again leek at the dagger — he at length came down, and after sitting same time in a contemplative posture, opened the desk and again the dagger met my eye — Curiosity could bear it no longer — “What a singularly beautiful dirk, I exclaimed — he started as if he had been shot, but suddenly recovering himself, said, with a look which seemed as if he would react, my very thoughts, “Why did you make that remark?” I felt abashed, but he immediately added, “Since you appear anxious to know my history, I will tell it you. Do you see that,” he exclaimed, as he moved the light hearer and paced the dagger before me — “blood,” I answered, sickening at [page 57:] the sight — “Ay, blood! — blood! to save one drop of which I would give an this miserable body contains — and yet,” added he, wildly, “‘twas I that shed it!” — He buried his face he his hands and groaned deeply — in a few moments he became more composed, and began his story.

“The events of my boyhood I pass over — suffers it to say, lost my parents at an early age, and was left to the care of a relation. I received a good question, and knew sorrow but by name until I had attained ray eighteenth year. I then began a new existence — I was in love — Yes! if ever a man loved passionately — intensely, — I did. I was singular, romantic in my ideas, and Rosalie was equally so. I will pass over the few happy hours of our affection — they would be tedious, and I would not wish to bring them to my mind too forcibly — she promised me her hand, and declared that name but myself should ever possess it — Oh! my friend, you are youth but beware bow you entrust your heart and happiness into the keeping of a woman! — it is this that has brought me to what I am — a wretched outcast — a murderer! — a broken-hearted. desperate being’.” —— The perspiration stood in large drops on his forehead — after a remise of a moment he continued:

“I was too much restricted by poverty to marry — but I believed that I possessed talents which would place me beyond the reach of its effects — I accordingly embraced an offer from a friend to engage in a trading voyage to the West Indies, and as my health was delicate, my friends considered the climate would restore my frame to its usual vigour. I bade a farewell to home and to Rosalie — that kiss! — that farewell kiss, was our last.

We were detained nearly a year trading to different ports, and altho’ I had written home every opportunity, had never received an answer. It was with such feelings of rapturous joy which language is incapable of defining, that I saw our vessel fast approaching my native land — a thousand endearing recollections rushed on my mind — the thought that my, Rosalie was false, had never entered my brain — I would have blushed if it had done so.

It was night when our boat landed roe at the wheel; and I flew with a beating heart towards her dwelling.

I forgot to mention the dagger — I purchased it with some other trinkets on account of he beauty, and had that day carelessly put it in my waistcoat pocket

There were lights in the front of the house and I heard music — I visited to see her alone, and went to the garden gate — [page 58:] every thing reminded me of hee blissful hours I had passed — I walked towards the servants’ houses, intending to get one or them to carry a message to Rose. The first one I met had often carried letters between us — but she did not recognize me, until I spoke, when she exclaimed, “O Lord! Master is it you! — Miss Rose is to be married in half an hour!” — burst into tears. I have often since been surprised at my own firmness, for I listened calmly to her tale! — ‘twas short — a wealthy suitor had been proposed and was accepted. I asked if she could not procure me an interview — that, she said was impossible, but if I would stand in the passage might see her as she passed to the room. Thither I went, and as there was only a small lamp burning, I could not easily be discovered — I heard her laughing and talking gaily in her dressing room — strange feelings came over me — a thousand lights seemed to dance before my eyes — a difficulty of breathing, and a confused sensation of pain oppressed me — when I came to myself I was leaning against the wall, and my hand convulsively grasping the dagger.

The door opened, and Rosalie with several others, came into the passage — I waited until she watt nearly opposite to use, when I let fall the cloak with which I had concealed my face, and exclaimed “do you know me! — I am Edgar Leonard!” — She shrieked at the mention, and I buried say dagger in her bosom!”’ ——

He paused — his counter/Parsee was livid, and he bit his lip till the blood spouted on tee table before him — Alter a few moments he became more composed, and hastily swallowing a glass of wine, proceeded.

“I remember nothing afterwards until I found myself in the street — my hand felt stiff, and when I held it up in the moonlight, I discovered that it was blood — the truth flashed across my bewildered mind — ‘twas Rosalie’s life-blood! the dagger, too, looked dim — that too was stained with the blood of her, for whom, but one short hour previous to the fatal disclosure of her inconstancy, every drop in my own voices should have freely flowed! — I knew not bow I got there, but I was in the boat, and I remember telling the men to land me on the opposite shore. I wished to fly, if possible, front thought. and embarked under a feigned name in a vessel for Colombia. in. tending to join the Patriots. On our passage we were captured by this vessel, and as I was now an outcast from society, I gladly joined them, and at the death of their captain I was chosen the commander.

I am weary of life, yet, although a murderer, I cannot commit [page 59:] suicide. I have courted death, but it shuns me — so true it is, that

“Life’s strange principle will longest lie

Deepest in those who wish the meet to die.”

You have now beard the history of my ill-fated life — but I base something more with you” — with this, he opened a chest and drew thence a bag of gold — “Take this,” said he, — “it may benefit you — me it never can — and yet,” he bitterly added, that at one time, perhaps, would have made me the happiest of mortals in the possession of any” — He stopped short — and suddenly clasping his heeds to his forehead, he reeled and sunk senseless on the floor, ere I could recover from the bewildering maze which had seized upon my faculties. — He slowly recovered, and, when he seemed somewhat composed, I endeavored to persuade him to renounce his present mode of life, and again return to the bosom of civilized society — “Never!” exclaimed he, with a vehemence which made me shrink back with terror — “Never shall my outlawed foot pollute the soil of my much injured country — some speedy vengeance may here close my hated existence — but to bear in retirement those stings of remorse with which my guilt-stricken conscience is afflicted, would be worse than a thousand deaths on the ocean, where every nerve would be firmly strung in the conflict.” His firmness awed me into silence, and I felt no inclination to renew my endeavors to avert him from his purpose.

In a few days we fell in with a vessel bound to Charleston, in which I obtained a passage, and, after bidding an affectionate farewell to the youthful commander of the pirate, to whose attention and kindness I was mainly indebted for my restoration to health, we kept on our course homeward, and his little barque was soon beyond the reach of our observant. When the last glimpse was extinct, (and until then I stood motionless on the deck,) I retired to the cabin, where I found that not only my baggage had been safely and carefully delivered through his orders, but that the gold which I had intentionally left in the cabin of the corsair, was also placed in the hands of the captain, to be delivered to me.

After a pleasant run of five days we reached our destined port, and it being the sabbath day on which we landed, my first duty was fulfilled in repairing to the church and offering up my grateful acknowledgements for the signal display of the finger of providence in my behalf, — and in which a prayer for the unfortunate pirate was not forgotten.” [page 60:]