In travelling some years since in Spain it happened that I arrived early in the, morning at the small yet beautiful and romantic village of De V— A—, situated immediately on the coast. I had seen the ocean in its wildest anger, and in its soft and soul-subduing calmness — but I had never seen any thing half so beautiful as the enchanting scene which now met my delighted eyes. On the right, towering mountains here and there decked with a small patch of green that indicated the industry of the owner of the small hut which peeped almost with a conscious bashfulness through the luxuriant vines — blushing in their fulness that their beauty claimed no richer lord: — and on the other side the blue waters of the classic: Mediterranean, rolling gently in as if totally unconscious of its own wild and terrific power,

”Slumbering as a giant in his strength.”

To heighten the scene several urchins with the dark black eyes and brilliant colored dresses peculiar to Spain, were linking in the Sun as if they wished, to take advantage of the sleeping waters — Envious lot! — where is the being that does not look back to those days,

”When peace had o’er power.”

I almost wished, isolated as I felt myself, to pass my days here — but I had a brother whose absence from his friends for several years, on account of a slight ,misunderstanding. had. induced me, at the request of a loved parent whose eyes had been recently closed in death, to visit this east in search of him, to use my endeavors to persuade him to return to his home. With this duty before me, I had employed no inconsiderable portion of try time in its performance, and however reluctant I might feel to leave this interesting spot, duty required that I should stay no longer than to make the necessary enquiries.

After seeing my mules accommodated, and having dined rather sumptuously, taking a Spanish inn with its fare into consideration, (although not without thinking of Gill Blas and his ragouts) I strolled out on the beach — After walking a considerable distance, musing on the almost romantic cause of ray travels, and the slight chance I had of succeeding, I seated myself in a recess in the rocks to enjoy more leisure.), the beauties that surrounded me. [page 66:]

I had learnt that Leonard, my brother, had been seen in some part of Spain leading a wild and reckless life — indeed, it was believed that he had commanded a corsair or smuggler, on the coast, but as it was merely a report, the fact could not be sufficiently established for my entire belief.

It was now dark, and the heavy clouds that flitted hastily before the moon foretold that the sea lately so calm and beautiful, would soon be agitated by a storm; the hollow moaning of the surf as it rolled heavily in and broke more fiercely, confirmed it. Dreading to be exposed to the weather, and feeling it time to return, I prepared to do so, when I perceived a boat swiftly approaching the shore — startled at this in so retired a situation, I again concealed myself in the recess, after having cast an anxious and hurried look to a vessel at anchor within the breakers, and not more than half a mile distant. It was evident the boat belonged to her, and I could not help thinking it was some mad infatuation or egregious folly, that could induce a man to anchor in such a situation, particularly as there was now every sign of a tempest which needed cot the experienced eye of a seaman to confirm.

I had not long observed their motions before a young man landed from the-boat, and after speaking to one of the men, ran hastily up the mountains. I marked his course, but the darkness at the moment prevented my seeing whether he took the road to the village, or the, one on the left which led to a nunnery.

Although wishing to return home, I felt almost afraid to expose myself to the seamen — so dreadful were the tales related by my landlord, of the desecrate acts of the Spanish smugglers, and you may be assured appearances were not in favor of those men — every one of them was armed, and as the moon gleamed on their long knives, I was fully convinced it was much safer to be in-my hiding place than to run any risk.

One of the men, a tall, herculean fellow, seemed to pace the sands with a great deal of impatience, and as I was but a short distance off, I could distinctly hear all he said.

“Another “fool’s errand,” exclaimed he — “but the game will be up this time I’m thinking — those northeasters, when they do blow, blow it out.”

“Yes, indeed!” answered another — “these Levanters are Curious winds — I remember one dark night off Alicant, in the Sophia” —

“Silence! and mind your boat,” said the first — do you want her to thump her bottom out. — Beach her, boy! beach her!” At the instant he spoke, a flash, followed by a report from the ship appeared to add to his impatience. [page 67:]

“Ay, there must be something now! for our love-sick captain left word if there was any danger, to fire — and old Truly is not the boy to be frightened with trifles — Another gun! and a light at the mast head! exclaimed the irritated seaman, as the signals were made which he mentioned — “Heavens! ‘tis too much, to risk as fine a vessel as ever floated, and as gallant a crew as ever manned a ship, for the sake of a. woman.’

“Ay! you may well say that,” replied the seaman Who had first interrupted him — “these women are fearful things — it fact I have almost a kind of disliking to our captain’s long weather cloak — it puts one so much in mind of a petticoat.”

“Up oars, boys!” shouted the coxwain — the captain and a lady” —

The moon which had been apparently struggling to throw a little light, was now totally obscured, and I had no opportunity of discovering anything more than what I had overheard, — that the captain was accompanied by a lady.

They were all now in the boat which dashed gallantly off in the direction of the vessel, and I soon heard the seamen Weighing, anchor., ..Curiosity chained me to the spot — to save the vessel seemed almost impossible, as the wind had now increased to a gale, and blew directly on shore — she would have to beat out, and the least mismanagement would send her on the reef, where the foam in the occasional light of the moon shone with a terrific whiteness.

At length the sails were spread — and I could perceive her stretching across between4he breakers, and I now began to entertain some hope; — they had one more tack to make ere she would clear the shoals; and as she stood gallantly on the very edge of them, I muttered a fervent prayer for their safety. I could hear even amid the noise of the winds and waves the. hoarse voice which called the men to their stations — my heart felt as if ‘twas freezing; — it was now, or never! Gracious heaven! — she missed says, and in a moment was in the breakers, hardly to be distinguished from the mass of foam that surrounded her! —

The next day many of the bodies drifted on shore, among them that of a lady who had eloped from the convent the evening preceding. I looked for some time for her companion, and at last discovered him — but when I brushed the sand from his brow, what was my horror on discovering the countenance of my long-sought Brother! 